---
layout: post
title: 'EuroRust 2023: Fostering Connections and Ideas in the Rust Community'
toc: true
authors:
  - yijunyu
  - GuillaumeGomez
  - davidtwo
  - m-ou-se
  - Amanieu
  - lcnr
  - lucarlig
  - haitao
---

EuroRust 2023, held in Brussels from October 12th to 13th, 2023, was a week
filled with insightful discussions, valuable exchanges, and exciting prospects
for the Rust community. While conferences often center around talks and
presentations, many attendees, including myself, found the true essence of
EuroRust lay in the connections we forged and the ideas that blossomed through
these interactions. As its LiveStreaming sponsor, the talks have been broadcasted
to over 100K developers who could not attend in person.

## Building Meaningful Connections

One of the remarkable aspects of EuroRust was the opportunity to meet
face-to-face with fellow Rust enthusiasts. In a digital age where most
collaboration occurs online, the chance to sit down and share ideas with
colleagues was invaluable. Every day brought encounters with familiar
collaborators and the exciting prospect of working with new ones. After all,
open source thrives on collaboration, and EuroRust exemplified this principle.

## Birthing Ideas and Insights

The week was brimming with the birth of innovative ideas and profound insights.
Members of the Rust Types team explored exciting language concepts, discussions
on Rust project governance took place among council members, and plans for
future Rust conferences were shaped with RustNL organizers. Visits to the
offices of Huawei and AWS provided a glimpse into their Rust-related
initiatives, and introductions between individuals from various companies laid
the groundwork for future collaborations.

## Motivation and Renewed Focus

EuroRust breathed new life into our work and motivations. While we are
accustomed to working together online, events like EuroRust enable interactions
that spark fresh ideas and renewed dedication to the Rust community. From panel
discussions to engaging talks, the enthusiasm of hundreds of Rustaceans in
attendance was a sight to behold.

## Diverse Perspectives

It's worth noting that not all aspects of the conference resonated equally with
every attendee. Some found the talks closely aligned with their work, while
others sought different insights. The diversity of perspectives and experiences
added to the richness of EuroRust.

## Looking Ahead

As EuroRust 2023 comes to a close, the memories of fruitful discussions,
connections made, and innovative ideas birthed will continue to drive us
forward in the world of Rust development. The conference served as a reminder
that while talks provide knowledge, it's the people and the connections we
establish that truly propel the Rust community forward.

In conclusion, EuroRust 2023 was a testament to the power of collaboration,
idea generation, and the vibrant spirit of the Rust community. As we leave
Brussels, we carry with us not only new insights but also the motivation to
push the boundaries of what Rust can achieve. Until the next EuroRust, let's
keep building, coding, and forging connections that make Rust the remarkable
language it is today.

